#PROPOSED PROJECT TITLE:
  "Using text data analytics to facilitate smart philanthropy"

#BRIEF DESCRIPTION:
  "A troubling feature of the philanthropic landscape is that funds change hands often based upon the slippery foundation of personal     sentiments, brand familiarity, and/or nonprofit reputation.  Could the tools of data science improve donor decision-making by           providing potential donors with more, targeted, and similar, options? The purpose of this project is to use the tools of natural  language processing, specifically clustering and topic modeling, to create a “data driven giving” dashboard to bring data intelligence to the philanthropic decision-making."
  
#PROJECT NICHE:
  "There are many levels of data-driven decision-making in the philanthropic space.  The least data-oriented approaches are those that emphasize personal ties or personal sentiments above all other indicators.  One manifestation of this is giving only to those organizations with whom there already exists a direct personal relationship.  Another is giving only to organizations that are perceived to be suitably thrifty, apolitical, religiously compatible, or other subjective indicators of “good” nonprofit behavior. 
A more data-oriented approach is use of common rating tools, such as the Better Business Bureau’s accreditation status or rankings provided by Charity Navigator.  While these tools are excellent consumer-side evaluations of nonprofits, they are relatively opaque measures based upon an analysis of the history and tax-filings of the organizations as a single unit without specific comparison to related organizations or all other organizations.  Although these helpful tools take some of the analytical work out of choosing a philanthropic approach, they may not wholly satisfy the needs of organizations determined to be the most targeted in their philanthropic approaches. 
For data-driven givers seeking to construct their own philanthropic analytics, it is possible to use vetted codes, like the NTEE provided by the National Center for Charitable Statistics, to determine which organizations they might partner with to meet specifics in their philanthropic missions.  Recent research, however, has shown that the NTEE codes often incorrectly or incompletely identify the range of organizations that fit a specific social purpose.  Using such approaches leaves companies with a higher risk ofchoosing in appropriate partners or missing organizations that are apt, mission driven, partners..  
Smart corporations seeking better giving analytics already know that Amazon web services (AWS) hosts a treasure trove of XML ready IRS 990 forms, within which a non-profit’s mission statement is listed.  Using relatively straight forward text data techniques, such as dictionary-based classification of missions, smart corporations might identify better specific organization to serve their philanthropic goals.  However, there are computational costs for extracting and cleaning this large amount of data and classification dictionaries for many social service areas, such as homelessness, at-risk youth support, or specific environmental causes are lacking, which raises personnel costs for development of these dictionaries.  Further, dictionary based approaches require significant ex ante knowledge and highly reliable data, which are also costly.  Finally, what a nonprofit organization lists in its mission, the only section of purpose-driven text easily extracted from IRS990s, may be only a small part of what they do.  The high likelihood that an organization fosters programs that are latent mission components means that donors might also miss ideal partnerships when looking only at the surface.
#HOW THIS PROJECT FACILITATES DATA DRIVEN PHILANTHROPY:
In this project, I propose to use the tools of automated data scraping and natural language processing, including topic modeling and cluster analysis, to create a dashboard for smart philanthropy.  The ideal outcome of this project is a web-hosted dashboard the presents donors a menu of philanthropic alternatives based upon their previous or expected philanthropic activities. For example, a donor that previously gave to cultural preservation causes would like to build a philanthropic portfolio rich in these activities would be able to specify "cultural preservation" or a previous organization they donated to and could find other organizations with a similar mission that may not be obvious to either a simple web search or covered under the NTEE codes. The goal of this project is to:
1)	Present an attractive and understandable set of latent topics to potential donors so that they can best identify the range of purposes for which they would like to direct their philanthropy
2)	Identify a set of organizations fitting the topics desired and produce easily interpretable, scalable, visuals to give a desired number of partnership possibilities.
3)	Connect well to other nonprofit evaluation sites such as Charity Navigator without being dependent on its data
#PRESENT STATE OF PROJECT DEVELOPMENT
At present, this project is at the “proof of concept” stage wherein I am striving to determine which source of data on non-profit activities is best, where best is understood as 1) stable and available, 2) tractable to robust text data analytics methods, and 3) produces the results most consistent with human understanding.  Most recently, a sample of 260 nonprofit organization “About Us” page text, mission statements, and vision statements were pulled from the list of organizations with a BBB rating.  As the BBB data is not extractable, these were excerpted by hand.  A subsample of these were compared against the statemeents in the IRS 990s to determine the stability of either data source. This extraction process releaved known problems in nonprofit analysis—the size and tenure of the organization often drives the completeness and stability and robusticity of their organization statements.  Smaller nonprofits often listed 2 of 3 types of text while larger organizations offered all 3.  Smaller organizations with fewer resources also either did not put these statements on their webpages or entered what was publicly offered as their vision statement as their mission statements in the 990s.  This preliminary analysis suggests that nonprofit data is unstable and some resources touted as complete may not be so. 
Using the material extracted, I performed preliminary text mining operations on the data.  Analysis of term frequencies, simple associations, and analysis of the data using k-means clustering and latent Dirichlet analysis (LDA) topic models were performed on three data sets—“Abouts”, “Missions”, and “Visions”.  
These preliminary analyses revealed that “Mission” and “Vision” text is not wholly robust to high-level content analysis without substantial revisions to important parameters.  This is due in part to the size of this initial sample, the overall number and sparsity of terms, and the strong associations between terms across the data.  These important preliminaries point to the need for this proposed project to be better informed by the tools offered in this data science fellowship. 
# GRAPHICS PRESENTED HERE
Results of an LDA (Latent Dirichlet Analysis) of the same sample of organizations to show that the terms uncovered and linked together by tools of text data analysis yield both surprising and unremarkable results. 


